Just carbonizing your app,
although that will get you on 10,
isn't really going to necessarily
deliver the full user experience that
users are going to come to expect when
they start using the OS in general.
They're going to be looking for
things like sheets and different
behaviors that Aqua presents.
So this session helps you understand
what that design philosophy
was behind Aqua so that as you
start to bring your app to 10,
you can start to design your interface
and your user experience around that.
So to talk about the design of Aqua,
I'd like to introduce It's Don Lindsey,
the head of the human
interface team here at Apple.
Thanks John.
Okay, Aqua Overview.
I'm going to talk about Aqua today.
I'm not going to talk about architecture,
I'm not going to talk
about frameworks or APIs.
In fact, I promise I won't show any
more slides like this at all.
This is the only one.
What I do want to talk
about is what is Aqua?
Steve, when he introduced it,
said it is the user
interface of Mac OS X.
and I want to expand on that
a little bit because I think
there are some misconceptions.
I also want to talk about
what is new in Aqua.
What have we introduced?
Many of you today probably already
have applications shipping on Mac OS 9.
I want to point out those things
which are a little bit new in
Aqua that you should be aware of.
I also want to talk about what
we've changed since Macworld.
We introduced this thing
almost six months ago now,
and we haven't just been sitting back.
We've been pretty busy.
Steve mentioned we've been listening
to the feedback we got from you having
played with Developer Preview 3,
and we're making some changes.
We're making improvements.
And finally, at the very end,
I'm going to bring John back on stage,
who's going to list for you
all of the sessions that are
related to adopting Aqua.
So let's get started.
What is Aqua?
Well, judging by the email I get
and what I read online,
I'm beginning to think that
Aqua is a kaleidoscope scheme.
Or it's a SoundJam skin,
or it's one of those things.
Aqua is the user interface for Mac OS X.
Okay, what does that mean?
What do we say when we
say it's a user interface?
Well, obviously, it is an appearance,
yes.
But it's also a set of behaviors.
It's how things respond
when you select them.
It's also a set of features that we
provide that are available to you,
things like our Save panel,
our Print panel,
that you can use and adopt to
deliver Aqua in your applications.
It's also a collection of
applications that we ship,
like the Finder and various
utilities that we ship.
Collectively, this describes the user
experience of Mac OS X.
So again,
user experience is not just appearance,
but it is behaviors,
and it is a set of features
that you can adopt.
Now what you may find surprising
is that from my standpoint,
you're also contributing to Aqua.
If you carbonize your app and you
deliver it on Mac OS X and you do
a really poor job of adopting Aqua,
then you're weakening the
user experience of Mac OS X.
People are going to run it and
they're going to be confused.
For years and years,
we have been touting consistency as
one of the most important aspects
of the Macintosh user experience.
So it's important for me,
it's important for Apple,
that you understand what we're
trying to achieve with Aqua.
So that's what I want to talk about.
When we started Aqua,
almost two years ago,
we started thinking about this new
user experience we wanted to deliver.
We've stated a number of goals,
things we wanted Aqua to achieve.
The very first of which was that
Aqua had to deliver the best
user experience of any commercial
operating system on the market,
unsurpassed.
Somewhat of a lofty goal,
but we're up to the task.
It had to be fun.
We wanted to bring back
joy of use to computers.
Things have gotten so complex that
we had to find ways to address this.
We had to find ways to make it simpler.
Mac OS has a very long tradition
of setting the standard for
ease of use in our industry.
and with Aqua,
we wanted to build on that.
We didn't want to just throw
that away and start again.
We know what the
strengths of Mac OS 9 are.
We had full intentions
of using them in Aqua,
but we also saw opportunities
to improve upon that.
[Transcript missing]
Finally,
we wanted Aqua to be recognizable.
We wanted it to have a strong identity.
Apple is about leadership
and product design.
And we've been hugely successful with
our hardware in the last two years.
And now with Aqua,
we want to do the same with our software.
So what is new?
You have a Mac OS 9 app.
You're carbonizing it.
Things that you should be aware of.
So first of all, appearance.
Appearance is new in Aqua.
And there is only one appearance in Aqua.
This is it.
This is the very first slide that
was publicly shown at Macworld.
Revealing the user interface
or the appearance of Aqua.
Today I actually considered giving
slides of each and every control
and talking about them all,
but then I said, I don't have to do that.
I could just show this.
This really captures all of what
the appearance is trying to achieve.
This button speaks to what the
design language of Aqua is.
It is light, it is clear, it is fresh,
it is clean, it is crisp, it is subtle.
Where platinum relies on black
lines and gray lines to define
frames of windows and the shapes of
buttons and the volume of a button,
Aqua uses much more subtle visual cues.
We're using shadow, we're using light,
we're using color, we're using color.
We're using very subtle tonal gradations.
We can do this because we've got quartz.
We've got this great graphics
engine underneath that allows us to
draw these to the screen very fast.
So rather than linger on each and every
control and walk you through all those,
I thought I'd rather look at more
interesting parts of the appearance.
Other areas which are related to
appearance but are not directly
related to how a control looks.
And one of those is translucency.
Now,
we played around a lot with translucency.
We tried translucent windows and
we tried all sorts of controls
that were fading in and fading out.
And what we discovered in all
of that exploration was that
translucency is a novelty.
That you could very quickly tire of this.
So our conclusion was that translucency
only added value if it had meaning.
This is very important because
this comes up again in something
else I'm going to talk to.
We chose to use translucency
on those controls which are
of more transient nature.
So for example, I can see here a menu.
Um, menus come and go.
They only exist for a very short time.
You make a selection and it disappears.
Translucency is nice because it
reinforces that a menu is very light.
Likewise,
we use translucency in our sheets.
Sheets, again,
typically only exist for a short time.
They're usually not presented
for long periods of time.
Saving a document, printing a document,
or an alert, for example.
Sheets come and go.
Therefore, translucency was perfect.
Translucency was perfect for
sheets as well because sheets are
tied to their parent document.
Of course, they obscure some of the
content that's underneath.
So using translucency allowed you to
reveal just enough that was underneath
to remind you what that document was.
Like translucency,
we had the opportunity to
use a lot of color in Aqua.
And we tried a lot of colors.
We played around with color for
the better part of the last year,
trying to find what kinds of colors,
what palette to use,
what would be our theme of our color.
But like translucency,
we came to the conclusion that color
was useful only again if it had
And in this example,
in this dialogue where you
see an assortment of controls,
color says, I am the selected control.
I am the one you've chosen.
In the tab, for example,
that is the selected tab.
Radio buttons, check boxes,
and even the pop-up says that I am
the current choice that you have.
That's the meaning of color and how
we've chosen to color our controls.
In the windows,
we actually have used three colors.
We have three controls in our title bar.
We've carried forward from Mac OS 9.
We have the close box.
We have the minimize control.
And we have the zoom control.
And they have very
different functionality.
So we decided, first,
we knew we wanted to group them.
Secondly,
we had to distinguish them somehow.
So we chose to go with three colors.
It's somewhat of a playful decision,
but I think it's quite effective.
One interesting aspect of the appearance,
it's related to appearance,
but it's not specifically
how something is rendered,
but rather our approach to how
we've chosen to organize the screen.
These three examples,
actually including the doc,
four examples, show how we've decided to
take a more center justified,
actually that's not even correct,
I would say center biased
approach to organizing the screen.
The sheet is in the middle of the window.
The controls in the dialogue
have a more central alignment,
central biased alignment to them.
The tabs are in the middle of the window.
Even in the QuickTime player,
the play control, the most important
control on that window,
smack in the middle.
Other controls are organized around that.
The dock is centered.
It remains centered,
regardless of how many
things you add or remove.
It always stays center
aligned on the screen.
Even the Apple logo you
see in the menu bar,
even that center of the screen.
This is an important
change because platinum was
typically more left justified.
We've changed it a little bit.
This is primarily an aesthetic decision.
It's about achieving
balance and symmetry.
We think it makes for
a much cleaner design.
So beyond appearance,
we've added a few new behaviors.
We've changed some behaviors.
Mac OS, when it was first introduced,
and what it popularized in
graphical user interfaces,
were two key tenets.
One, direct manipulation.
When you grab something on
the screen and moved it,
you were moving that object.
You were operating on that object.
And yet for 15 years we've been dragging
gray rectangles around the screen.
Aqua changes that.
We have live dragging.
We have live resizing.
Live scrolling.
Everything is live.
We've taken direct manipulation
all the way to its conclusion.
The other thing that was about
Mac OS that was respected was the
fact that it provided feedback.
It told the user at any time,
"This is what you are doing.
This is the status of the task
that you're trying to accomplish."
In Aqua, again in part thanks to Quartz,
we have the ability to do more
interesting animations and transitions.
We're able to say,
you saw this morning in the keynote,
a minimized window,
how it animates into the dock.
We're able to achieve that.
We're able to illustrate to you
where this window is going to.
It's really quite successful.
So in addition to behaviors,
We looked at introducing
a few new features,
user interface features.
Now these are things that are available
in our frameworks in Carbon and
Cocoa that you can take advantage of.
And we've designed them to solve specific
problems that we recognize exist today,
not just in Mac OS 9,
but in all operating systems.
When Mac OS was originally built,
designed and built, you could only open
one document at a time.
You can only run one
application at a time.
Things have changed a
little bit since then.
It's not uncommon today to have for
an intermediate or an expert user to
have five to ten applications running.
Fifteen to twenty windows
open on the screen.
This is chaos.
So we've looked for ways to
help people focus on what
they're trying to accomplish.
We look for opportunities to
introduce new features to reduce
the modality in the system.
Areas or at times during a
task where you are blocked,
we try to reduce that.
I'll explain a little bit more of
that when we get to that feature.
And finally,
we look for ways to help people
manage all this clutter on the screen,
all these windows.
So let's look at a few of these features.
window layering.
Now, if you're familiar with Mac OS,
you know that if I have, say,
five windows open in a word processor,
and I just want to one
of those to work on.
If I select it,
all five windows come to the front.
It's not what I wanted.
I just wanted that one.
It's not,
it reinforces the fact that we are,
we remain in Mac OS 9 very
conscious of applications and the
layering between applications.
So with Aqua, we wanted to change that.
We wanted to move more towards
focusing on the content,
on the document the person's working on.
So we've changed the way windows layer.
We now allow full interleaving
of windows between applications.
So when I've got five word processing
documents open and I just want to
work on one and I at the same time
perhaps have ten illustrations open
and say my task is to copy one of the
illustrations into my word processor,
I don't need to bring all
five illustrations forward.
I just bring the one I want.
And I put it into the word
processing document I want.
We think this is a much
more natural way to work.
and it really facilitates moving
content between individual documents
without having to be conscious about
applications coming forward and receding.
Sheets.
Sheets show, Steve showed sheets.
That's a tough word.
He showed that in the
keynote this morning.
This is a really important concept.
Not just a nifty way to
show a window opening.
It's really important.
And it's important because
It takes modality in the
system to the document.
Today in Mac OS 9,
if I want to save a document
in my word processor,
I'm presented with what's called
an application modal dialog.
There's nothing else I can do in that
application while that dialog is open.
I can switch to another application,
but maybe that's not what I want.
Maybe I want to switch to another
document to check something.
So now we've taken modality
to the document level.
Each document-- I can open a save sheet
on five separate documents if I choose.
Now the interesting thing about
sheets to reinforce this document
modality is that sheets are attached
to the document that they were
generated from or that they apply to.
So as I move the document around,
the sheet follows it.
That's an example of how a behavior
reinforces this relationship
between these two windows.
And we've seen some examples today.
Steve showed a save sheet.
Maybe he should have showed print.
That would have been easier.
Drawers are interesting.
We did not see drawers in
the keynote this morning,
although Steve did show drawers
in his keynote at Macworld.
He showed it in the
context of our mail client.
Now drawers are a way for us to provide
access to less frequently used controls.
This is part of managing the clutter.
This is a way for you to decide perhaps
there is a set of controls or a set
of functionality that doesn't need
to be in the user's face all the time
that maybe I want to put into a drawer.
They're easy to get at, easy to open.
You can leave them open if you so choose.
And we'll show that mail
example today in a demo.
I think you'll find
that pretty interesting.
and then use with changed
menus a little bit uh...
Two menus were lacking on Mac OS as it
matured and we reached a point where
we were running multiple applications
and had multiple documents open.
It was obvious that we had no menu that
was generic to the application itself.
Previously,
and as is the case in Mac OS 9 today,
we have a Quit in the File menu,
and we have Preferences string elsewhere.
So we've created an application menu.
This menu is intended to provide commands
that apply to the application as a whole.
Don't apply to a specific document
or the content in that document.
And we've made it the
first menu on the menu bar.
So we've created a nice hierarchy.
We have the very first menu,
which is your application menu.
The next one applies to the document,
opening and closing and printing.
And then every menu after
that is about content.
That creates a very nice hierarchy.
It's very easy to understand.
Now in DP3,
we used to put the application
icon in the menu bar.
And now in DP4, we put the application
name in the menu bar.
We're going to make
this a user preference.
We'll let people choose.
What do you want?
Now,
one of the things that's interesting is,
of course, we can have applications
with very long names.
So what we're asking of you
is to provide a short name.
We looked at the top 100 applications
that ship on Mac OS today,
and of those we found virtually
all had common short names.
Microsoft Internet Explorer is
often referred to as Explore.
Mavis Beacon teaches typing.
I don't know.
Mavis.
So we're asking you to provide a
short name for your application.
And that short name is described
in the application package
and it is used in this menu.
Now we also introduced a window
menu to help you manage windows.
Now as I said, of course,
we've changed how layering works.
Layering is providing interleaving
windows between applications.
A window menu is to help you when you
are in an application get access to
other windows that might be obscured.
Now another new feature which
we demonstrated at Macworld,
which we think is a
very important concept,
is the notion of single window mode.
Single window mode was designed to
help people focus on their task.
It was designed to allow you to
work on a single window and have
the feature minimize all the
other windows out of your view to
help you deal with that clutter.
Now we recognize that this
is a very important concept.
We really believe strongly that
there is a solution in this domain
to help people manage their clutter.
We also are not altogether stupid.
We recognize that
It's a great feature,
but it needs a little bit more work.
We've got to refine how this
works a little bit more.
So we're going to keep working
on single window mode because
we think it's important.
So all I ask you is to keep watching.
We're going to make some changes.
So what I'd like to do is
invite Bas Sorting on stage.
Bas is a member of the
user interface group.
There we go.
Thank you.
Is my audio working?
Yes.
Bas is going to take us
on a little tour of Aqua.
Now, I'll take the risk that we may
repeat much of what you might have
seen in the keynote this morning,
but I think what we'll do when we go
through this is point out some of the
details that may not have been obvious.
Bas?
Here we have another Aqua panel
showing some of the controls.
As you can see,
we have used blue to highlight,
to accent the widgets.
So if you select the checkbox,
it turns blue.
The pop-up menus, nice windows.
Here again, blue to accent the...
For the throbbing button,
we used to show activity and focus.
So you know what you're going to
hit when you press the return key.
Let me go on and show a window.
Well, as Don said before,
we try to avoid using black lines and
borders around windows and controls.
So it keeps it really clean and
much fresher and there's more focus
on the contents of the window.
The title bar controls show
the glyphs when you roll over.
Dragon Windows Surround is live,
which is really nice.
And they also know about the
boundaries of the screen.
So if you would move
them up to the menu bar,
they would stop there,
which is a nice little feature.
Let me bring up a second window.
So you can see the shadows
a little bit better.
And you can also see the
difference between active
windows and inactive windows.
If the window gets active,
it gets more shadowed,
so it gets lifted up from its background,
so to distinguish better between
active and inactive windows.
Also, you notice that the
title bars go inactive,
go translucent,
and the controls lose their color.
to bring up another window.
This is an example of how the
interleaved windows can work.
So now if I would click
on this image here,
I only bring that window to the front
and not the other window as well.
So I still have this window
in between the two others.
This allows me to, for example,
drag something in this window.
And let me try and add some text here.
[Transcript missing]
So from here you can
select your fonts and I,
let me pick something here.
Okay, one more feature was the menu
showing the transparency,
which is really nice because
they're transient and this makes
them feel much more lightweight.
The same thing happens also in Sheets.
Again, the transparency so you can
see the image underneath,
so you still see the content from
the window that it applies to.
Let me see.
If the window is too small,
You would get the little genie effect.
Again, and if the window is too close
to the edge of the screen,
it will move the window and move
it back as soon as you're done.
So let's close this.
One next thing I want to show is drawers.
So like in Mail, there's the drawer,
which is really handy.
Because you can-- oh, sorry, cancel.
This, by the way, shows the animation of
the progress bars in Aqua.
And let me show it again.
Because even though the
messages might stall for a bit,
the throughput, you still get feedback
that it's still alive,
it's still doing something.
And the progress bars in Mac OS 9,
they would get stuck and it would look
like the system is frozen or something.
So this provides much better feedback.
One more thing I wanted to show about the
drawer is if you drag messages around,
you can,
depending on the direction that you drag,
you can choose where the drawer is going,
to the left or the right.
And even when this is closed,
I can still start dragging a message and
pop open and I can drop it in a mailbox.
and the drawer with hide automatically
again and again here this some more
live tracking going on a lot of life
stuff it's all direct manipulation
Notice by the way in the scroll
bars the animated texture
makes it look more fluid.
Don, this is it for now.
Don will continue.
I'll be back later.
Open up a couple more documents again.
I just want to point something out.
So here is a good example
of the interleaved windows.
A couple other features we've
introduced is the ability to
operate on inactive windows.
For example, we can close a window that's
in the very back without having
to first bring it forward.
Also new in DB4, this is something that
didn't exist in DB3.
This is a Cocoa app that's
exhibiting a Mac OS 9 behavior,
the ability to move inactive windows.
I have a slide on this
a little bit later,
but we're actually looking at
bringing a lot more consistency
between Cocoa and Carbon.
I'll be back.
So that was just a quick tour.
Give you an idea of some of
the things that are in Carbon.
What I want you to look for is when
you see these screens-- and you've been
looking at Aqua all day long in a lot of
these third party demos and our demos.
And I want you to--
I want you to decide if
you think that this is,
if you feel anything that we
have tried to convey with it.
Do you feel that this is in fact
lighter and more fresh than platinum?
Because this was an
important goal for us.
I'd be interested in knowing if you
think we've achieved that or not.
Okay, since Macworld,
it's been five months,
we've done a few things,
things that are in DP4.
First of all, as I just mentioned,
we have more consistent behaviors.
Cocoa and Carbon have
very different heritage.
We've changed the behaviors
to try and make them more
consistent between the two.
I don't believe that as a user
you should be able to distinguish
between Cocoa and Carbon.
And that's something
we're trying to achieve.
That's been mentioned a few times today,
but we changed the size of controls.
When we first unveiled Aqua,
we had very large controls.
And that was intended to compensate
for much higher resolution
screens that we're seeing today.
You've probably noticed
that if you take your iMac,
set it at the very highest resolution,
those tiny little 32 by 32 icons are
getting a little difficult to hit.
So our original intent for
Aqua was to make things a little
bit bigger to compensate for that.
We also realize that that added
more effort to carbonization effort.
So we made a good business decision
and that is we've taken controls
back down in size and the fonts,
system font sizes,
to make them more consistent
with Platinum in an effort
to facilitate carbonization.
It should be easy.
We've enhanced the finder.
Steve mentioned this morning
we've made it more Mac-like.
In the next demo we're going to show you,
I want to point out exactly
how we've done that.
We've refined the dock.
The dock is a very important
feature in Mac OS X and in Aqua.
And we want to get this right.
It is the center of all
of what you are doing,
all of the tasks you're performing.
It's your apps, it's your documents,
your windows, folders.
It is your work.
So we want to get this right.
It has to work for you.
So we made changes.
And finally in DP4 we revealed our new
direction that we're going with icons.
We have a new style.
I'm going to walk you through that,
explain it.
So let's have a look.
Let's start with the Platinum controls.
Here we have, here's a typical Platinum
dialogue you'd see today.
Now when you run it, you aquify it.
Same size controls.
Much, much easier.
One of the complaints we got in DP3,
well, and from Macworld really,
was this whole notion of how we've
changed the finder really upset people.
and I read websites, I get email,
I've heard the complaints.
Steve makes a point of
forwarding them to me.
And all those complaints
didn't fall on deaf ears.
So we tried to understand
what it is about the finder
that is important in Mac OS 9,
in all versions of Mac OS.
What characteristics of that
finder do people want to preserve?
[Transcript missing]
We also preserved a few of those things,
a few characteristics that
we believe are important.
We'll look at those in a demo.
So again, we preserve the view for
each and every folder.
This is a key characteristic
of the Finder in Mac OS 9.
The layout, the view type, icon size,
the order of the columns,
the columns that are visible,
all of those are saved,
just like they are in Mac OS 9.
As you're navigating
down your file system,
each folder that you encounter,
if you had set it to a specific view,
it will be preserved and it
will be presented that way.
We've added a few more view options.
We're going to show you some of those.
I think they're kind of fun.
We believe that column view
for navigation is really an
exceptionally good way to
quickly navigate the hierarchy.
And we've combined that with
the ability to present a
folder in its preserved view.
So what we really believe we have
achieved is leveraging the strength of
column view as a navigation mechanism,
fast navigation mechanism,
and icon and list view as a
presentation method of showing
the contents of the folder.
And we'll show you how
we've combined those two.
Finally, we've allowed preferences to
have removable media show up on
the desktop when you insert it.
I put my CD in, my zip disk, boom,
shows up on the desktop.
We're also going to allow
you to put it in the dock,
too.
In part because the dock is on top.
The desktop gets buried.
I think that'll be a popular preference.
The Dock.
As I mentioned,
the Dock is a very important
feature in Mac OS X.
It's about organizing your work.
It's about your favorite things,
getting access to things.
And when we designed the doc originally,
and we demonstrated it in Macworld,
that doc had no structure to it.
It was completely unstructured.
The user could choose to
organize it any way they wanted.
We believe that people wanted that.
And the feedback we got was, you know,
we'd appreciate it if you actually
gave us a little bit of structure,
or you enforced a
little bit of structure.
In fact, we want to know what
are apps and what isn't.
So we designed the doc to do this.
We designed the doc to separate
out apps from everything else.
We think this actually works quite well.
We've also changed the
presentation of the doc.
As you saw in some of the demos earlier,
the doc is translucent.
You can actually put
things behind it now.
It's actually a very nice effect.
Now what's important about the dock and
what we're trying to solve by designing
the dock is that in Mac OS today,
you have the Apple menu,
What you can put applications
or documents in or folders in.
But it's impossible to configure.
Try it.
Have you tried it?
I'm sure you've tried
explaining to someone how to
add something to the Apple menu.
So we wanted to provide a mechanism
to replace the Apple menu,
but much easier configuration.
Adding and removing things is a breeze,
and it is with the dock.
Secondly, in Mac OS 9,
we have the launcher.
which provides very similar
functionality to the Apple menu,
just a different presentation.
And of course we have the Process Menu or
the Application Menu which allows you
to switch between running applications.
Well, there's a lot of overlap
between these three features.
and with the dock we're trying
to consolidate they're all
related this is an app by launch
it it's running i can selected
I don't need to go to three different
places or in this case say the
Apple menu and the application switcher.
I don't need to go to two different
places to see the status of an
application or to launch it.
So as I said,
what's key about the dock is it's
very easily user configurable.
We envision you adding
and removing things quite
frequently because it's so easy.
It'll always be a collection
of your favorite things,
things you want access to quickly.
It also is representation
of your current things,
things that you're
currently working with.
You're running apps and minimize windows.
So for this reason, the dock isn't,
in essence, your work.
It is your things you're
trying to accomplish.
This is our new icon style.
600 by 600 pixels.
One bit.
So when this was designed,
of course there were a lot of limitations
on the graphics capabilities back then.
If you've ever looked at a 32 by
32 icon on a nine inch screen,
it was quite nicely proportioned
relative to the other items.
As I said earlier,
that's a little bit different
today when you're working
on an Apple Cinema display.
For the handful of you who actually
have the privilege of doing that.
So first of all, we wanted to make things
a little bit bigger.
We had the opportunity to
think about how elements could
should scale in Aqua and
how they could be larger.
So we decided to break out of the
boundary of small 32 by 32 icons,
go a little bit larger.
But rather than take a
small incremental step,
we
We decided to take a big one.
In part because the doc uses
it when it's magnifying items.
But what's more interesting
about this icon is because of
the limitations at the time,
it was, in essence, iconic.
It couldn't communicate very much.
The hand,
now I can make out that there's a hand
here and I think it's holding what
looks to be maybe a pen or a pencil.
I believe this was the icon
for MacWrite originally.
And it just is trying to
capture what this tool does,
but it doesn't really communicate what
you might accomplish by using this tool.
It doesn't have any
emotional qualities to it.
So what we wanted to achieve with
Aqua was with our icon style.
Because we had the opportunity to
put such tremendous detail into
our icons because they were larger,
is we wanted to move towards
a more emotive style.
We wanted an application icon to say,
I'm not just a word processor,
but here's the things I can do.
I can create letters for you.
We can create letters.
In this case, this example is our preview
application for looking at images.
And it kind of suggests the kind
of reward or emotional reward you
might get by using this application
to look at your photographs
or other people's photographs.
But we think this is a subtle
while very important shift in how
we're approaching our icon designs.
The other thing we did is we've actually
designed what we're calling genres.
Now we've always had icon families
and families describe either icons
Icons belonging to an application,
for example, the application icon and
its corresponding document.
or an extension or a control panel.
We've always described those as families.
Now in the case of multiple applications,
we can of course have different
kinds of applications.
We can have applications which
the user may use to author
something or produce something,
perhaps a letter or a website.
But we also have utilities,
applications in which are
of a more technical nature,
applications that perhaps are best left
to somebody who knows what they're doing.
So we've described what
we're calling genres.
And I'll show you two examples,
two different collections
of each of those.
As I mentioned, the large size.
Rather than taking a small
increment going 48 by 48,
64 by 64,
we just went all the way up to 128.
I don't think we'll have to
revisit this size for a while.
I think if you do an icon now,
the larger size,
I think we're safe for a while.
Now what we've also done,
we haven't changed the format by which we
preserve or save our icons in our apps.
We're still using the ICNS format
introduced in Mac OS 9.
So we can support what we're
calling hints at smaller sizes.
Now while you can take 128 by 128 icons,
scale it down quite nicely,
and it preserves its image quite well,
right down to as small as 48 by 48.
Once you get down to about 32 by 32,
or especially down to 16 by 16,
those scaled icons start
to lose their meaning.
There's too much information.
So hints allow you to design
simpler icons at those sizes.
And as you scale them down,
the system will swap in these
hints and therefore present a
simpler icon at the smaller sizes.
That's an important concept.
It also allows you to
preserve your existing icons.
If you decide you're taking your
existing icons forward into Aqua,
you can save your 16 by 16, 32 by 32s,
you can use those today and
just create a larger one,
larger 128.
There you may want to put more detail in.
So here's an example of
our user application genre.
These are all applications which
you use to author something,
or in the case of preview,
just to view something.
These are intended to not
just say I'm an application,
which I think they all share an element
in common to say I am an application.
In fact, if you stretch it far enough,
I think you can still see there's
a diamond element in there,
which harkens back to the very
original application icon.
That's intentional.
But they're intended to
capture a mood or capture,
capture, I say capture an emotion.
I'm using that term a lot,
but it's important.
This is our utility genre.
These applications are
much more technical,
much more serious.
We've taken a different
color scheme to these.
I'm not showing you these to give
you specific instructions to do this,
but rather to get you to think
about what is your application.
Do you provide a utility?
Do you provide a game?
Perhaps games are even more
extravagant than these.
Maybe games are very
colorful and playful.
You can have the opportunity with
your icon to communicate what
your application is all about.
So again,
I'd like to call Buss back up on stage.
And let's go through,
and we're going to have a look
at the finder and the doc.
Let's pull up a finder window.
First of all,
what's nice about the new finder is
the fact that you can navigate the
file system and stay within one window.
I'll show you.
If I click on my hard drive,
I can go to my local accounts, users,
and my home directory.
I'll stay on one window,
so I don't have this mess of
all these windows coming up,
which is really nice.
One thing that improves this
is the toolbar on the top here.
You have channels,
so you can jump directly from, say,
for example, the main directory to the
documents folder without having
to go through the whole route.
The pop-up here shows where
you are in the file system.
You can use the back button to
go back to where you came from.
[Transcript missing]
One nice feature that's
been in the column view is,
well, first of all,
you see the whole path in the system.
And you can get nice previews
from your icons right away.
And let me get some applications here.
So you get to see the full
128 beautiful rich graphics,
which is really nice.
One more thing you can do in here
as well is you can see little
previews of the QuickTime movies.
Just in line, which is really great.
I don't answer questions right now,
sorry.
I would like to show
one feature we added,
which is if you double click on
a folder from the column view,
it switches back to its saved view.
So I can switch back
really easily like this.
Let's go to this one.
I double click.
I get this persistent view.
Suppose I would want to
change the size of my icon.
So I go to the View Options panel.
And from here, I can set the size of the
items for this window.
I can also choose if I want
to add a background picture.
So for example, I can add a background
Let me add something
to my home directory.
I want to have icon view and
I would like to have a nice
picture here in the background.
Let me see.
This one.
So now I can customize per
folder what it looks like and
I can put in any image I want.
While we're changing images anyway,
we can also change the
picture of the desktop.
Let
So you can pick any background you want.
Let me see.
The next thing I'd like
to show is the doc.
Actually, Buzz,
let me just-- I want to go
through a couple of things here.
I want to make sure people really
understand what we've changed.
Go to your documents folder
and drag a file to the desktop.
[Transcript missing]
I have to do the image already,
that's why.
In DP3 when you drag
something to the desktop,
it made an alias.
That's not what people wanted.
So you can use the desktop if you choose.
You can put all your stuff.
Another thing I want just to go
through again is this notion of using
the column view to quickly navigate.
Go right to the top of the
hierarchy in this case,
right up to the computer,
and just navigate down here very quickly
down to the document which you want.
and then just double click on it.
Boom.
Here you saw an example of
using column view to very
quickly navigate the hierarchy.
You got to where you wanted to be,
but you wanted to see it in the way
that it was intended to be presented,
the way you had left it.
You double click.
Boom.
The back button even puts you
back into column view if you want
to again continue navigating.
We think this is a solution
that really strengthens-- takes
advantage of the strengths of column
view and of icon and list view.
Perhaps another thing you can do
before you go on the dock is just
spawn a whole bunch of Windows.
Now, holding the Option key down,
you get just your container Windows.
So,
that's just the Mac OS way of doing it.
So, you still have that available.
and they will remember their size.
And the main finder window
always stays the way you set it.
That's important.
Those windows that were open,
just like Mac OS Finder windows do today.
They keep the size and the
position on the screen.
Okay, so let's-- Sorry to interrupt,
but-- No, it's okay.
Go back to the doc.
Let's move on to the doc.
So here's the dock.
First of all,
I think what's really nice is that you
can see it's a transparent background,
which makes it feel more lightweight.
Nice icons in there.
It's really great.
So you can see it's transparent
if I move windows behind it.
Let's open up one like this.
It's really pretty.
The main power of the dock is
you can very easily add your
applications and documents to it.
So if I would just drag this in here,
just insert it right away.
And again,
on the left side is applications and on
the right side is all your documents,
folders, and miniaturized windows.
In case you want to get rid
of things from your dock,
you just drag them out and
Let me try and add some more stuff here.
So if I have a multiple selection,
it just adds the multiple items in there.
And sometimes you see
things moving around,
and that's when you add
the same thing again.
See, it moves it to the right place.
The male viewer icon moves over
because it was already in the dock.
So let's add some more documents in here.
You notice the dock gets really small
so I can go to my preferences to set
the size of the dock to anything else.
And I can turn on magnification
in order to magnify the images.
And I can reorder the way I want it.
and I can turn on auto-hide.
So now,
if I move to the bottom of the screen,
I get the dark and the fisheye effect,
the magnification.
Let's miniaturize a window.
Again, you see the genie effect which
is really smooth and nice.
I can do it in slow motion again
so you can see what's happening.
If you watch the dock,
it's gradually making room
for the window to fit in.
So it's all very smooth and very precise.
So let's try it again from here.
Also, when the window is too
low below the dock,
it would move it up and
put it back in like this.
This was the dog.
Actually, Buzz,
while you've got those two images there,
I do want to demonstrate something.
I talked about single window mode
and I talked about how we were
trying to make things easier to work.
So if you could just maybe
open those two photographs up.
This is the way single window
mode is implemented today.
As you see,
when he turned on that control,
it minimized the background window.
And as he chooses other
minimized windows in the dock,
it swaps them out.
There's a lot of power in this.
And as I said,
we know it's not quite right,
but we really believe this
concept has a lot of value
in terms of managing clutter.
So that just gives you an idea of
really the essence of the idea.
And as I said,
we're going to keep working on that.
[Transcript missing]
All right.
That was it.
Do that again.
Thank you.
One more time?
OK.
One more time.
. OK.
Enjoy Mac OS X and Aqua.
Bye bye.
Great.
Thank you.
Okay?
So I've talked to you about
the appearance of Aqua.
I've talked to you about
some of the new behaviors.
some of the new features.
Of course, I'm not going into tremendous
amount of detail on each of these,
but I'm just trying to give you a sense
of those things you should be aware
of when you're carbonizing your app.
So to sum it all up, what Aqua is,
is more than appearance.
It is a set of behaviors
and a set of features.
It continues the tradition of Mac OS 9 in
terms of our advantage and ease of use.
It's ready today with
your DP4 CD installed,
which you've now had a few hours to do.
It is ready for you
today to start to adopt,
and you really ought to.
Because it's only by installing
it that it's going to get better.
As Steve mentioned,
we listened to the feedback from DP3 and
we continue to want you to give it to us.
So by installing it and working with it,
you can tell us where
it's not working for you.
We're running it.
At Apple today,
we have a few hundred people
running Developer PV4.
We're living on it,
as Bertram pointed out in his session.
So we recognize where
its shortcomings are.
We try to fix those.
Now here's a question.
Is it finished?
Are we complete with Aqua?
As I just said, no.
We're going to continue
to make it better.
From your standpoint, yes.
Start adopting it.
From our standpoint,
we've got a little bit
more polishing to do.
We're not quite happy with the
way everything is working yet.
We're going to continue to
tweak things a little bit.
The last bullet on there
is the most important one,
that is user interface guidelines.
Obviously,
we've made changes from Mac OS 8 and 9,
and therefore those human
interface guidelines don't quite
cover all of what is new in Aqua.
So we want to update these
guidelines and make them available
to you as soon as we can.
That's when I want to talk to
you about some of the things
we have made available to you.
So when we shipped DP3,
we had a document on that
disk that described how to
layout your dialogues for Aqua.
Now of course,
because we made the change to
platinum size controls in DP4,
we had to rev that document.
So we did.
That's on the disk.
And it's got some new information on it
with respect to menu layout on it too.
Available this week.
I don't have a URL.
I will get it for you.
But available this week on our website.
We're putting a very preliminary
version of our UI guidelines for Aqua.
This document just covers sheets,
window layering,
and a discussion of the icon style.
Things we think that are most
important for you to start adopting.
And as we describe guidelines for
all the other features in Aqua,
we're going to make them
available as quickly as we can.
We're not going to wait to rev
a new book every ten years.
We're going to get them out fast.
So this week what we have
running is what we call the H.I.
Lab.
We have sessions every hour.
It's in room K.
Now unfortunately it's booked solid.
I think there's something in
the order of 17 or 19 sessions
this week they filled up.
What we're asking you to do is put
your name on a sheet and we'll do
our best we can to accommodate you.
This is a one hour private session
that allows you to come in,
show us your application,
and myself and members of the
team will give you feedback.
What we think is worth it.
and what we think is not working.
And finally Friday,
what historically has always been
one of the most fun sessions,
perhaps to if you're asking questions
but not if you're sitting on the panel,
and that is the feedback forum.
So 2 o'clock Friday, room A1.
We have the Aqua Feedback
Forum this year.
It's in a big room,
so we can accommodate more people.
What I'd like to do at this point
is call John Galenzi back on stage.
John is going to walk through all
the related sessions this week
that you should attend if you
are interested in adopting Aqua.
John?
That's what I have,
so thank you very much.
Enjoy your week.
Okay, so we,
I had said in the opening that this
was all about the design of Aqua and
that later on this week we'd be
talking about specific implementation
issues and sessions and stuff.
So let me just run through the
roadmap and point you to some of
those sessions that are specifically
focused on particular components
of Aqua and how to implement them,
etc.
So the first one,
which is real key and really
mirrors this session closely,
is 142 High-Level Toolbox.
Another session that's really
important if you're interested
in prototyping your application,
seeing what Aqua looks like for
a new dialog design or whatever
is using Interface Builder.
This is a session for Data Browser.
Data Browser is a component.
It's a high-level control
that allows you basically to,
in a single control,
to present finder-like behavior,
lists that have disclosure
buttons and hierarchical displays.
It's a really great new set of
APIs for doing that kind of thing.
And if you leverage Data Browser,
you're going to get a lot of the
functionality that users are going
to expect from the finder within
your own application for lists,
et cetera.
Another session, 147,
Icon Services and Aqua,
really talks about designing icons,
new icon APIs,
issues to think about relative
to icons within your application
and new icon designs.
Navigation Services, number 149,
is all about the open and save dialogs,
how to take advantage of those
and do sheets in terms of open
and save within your apps.
Apple Help.
We didn't really specifically
touch on that in this session,
but the help for Mac OS X is HTML based.
And the session on Thursday, 145,
Apple Help talks about both from
a developer's point of view,
how do you implement the
Apple Help APIs within your application,
but also from a content
developer's point of view,
how do you author HTML help?
And what are some of the tricks
of the trade in that respect?
Session 144 isn't specifically tied to
Aqua in terms of visual aspects of Aqua,
but it ties into application
packaging and document typing,
which is a new behavior
under 10 in a sense.
It's new.
You need to understand that as
you do your applications on 10,
and there's some tie-ins to Aqua there.
And then the Aqua Feedback Forum.
And Don mentioned that.
What's really key about the Aqua Feedback
Forum is you as a developer,
you're adopting Aqua within your apps,
those issues.
And if you have issues about, well,
I'm not sure how this is going to work,
and what about this?
Have you guys thought about this?
That's the kind of
feedback we're looking for.
So it's really developer
adoption issues relative to Aqua.
So we look forward to you input there.
Specifically,
who to contact at Apple to get
more information about Aqua?
I'm going to start at the bottom,
first of all, with the email address,
MacHI at Apple.com.
That's an email address
that's monitored by myself,
by the human interface team,
the Aqua design team,
and a couple other people.
And really,
if you've got developer adoption issues,
or you've got some feedback
you'd like to give us on DB4,
as requested by Don,
please send it to that email address.
There's another general discussion list,
which is Apple HI,
Developer Adoption Issues.
And if you've got any questions,
please send it to us at db4.com.
And we have other developers
at public.lists.apple.com.
So that's just a general discussion
forum for you to talk about Aqua issues
and get other developers giving you
some insight into issues around Aqua.
And then sort of,
I'm going through the list backwards.
The last one, but first on this list,
is myself.
My role here at Apple is
User Experience Technology Manager,
which means I'm really a broker
of information between Apple and
yourselves as developers,
but also because I'm a developer.
So I'm really a broker of
information between you and Apple.
So as you work through DB4,
and as you work to bring your
applications to 10 and do the
right thing with Aqua and deliver
a really awesome user experience,
you may run into issues with
the APIs that exist or whatever.
And I'm really a good point of
contact to come into Apple and say,
hey, what about this?
This is our issue.
This is our situation.
Can you bring this to the
HI team or to the high-level
toolbox team or what have you?
And so really use me as that resource.
And the other thing I can do
is work with you to understand
the issues that you're having.
So I can help you understand Aqua and
help review your applications from
a user experience point of view
and help you determine whether
you're doing things the right way,
using the right metaphors.
Are you internally consistent?
All these sorts of HI-related things,
I'm also a resource for that.
So that's pretty much it for Session 140,
Aqua Overview.
Thank you for your attention,
and we look forward to
awesome apps on Mac OS X.